---
date: "2022-05-12T21:48:51-07:00"
title: About
---

## Written Description 

I decided to create a personal blog using blog down for my final project. This blog serves as a portfolio of visualizations I made using data that interests me. The general theme of my blog is examining the public data of wealthy elites. My first section, titled Political Donations, uses a data set from Kaggle scraped from FiveThirtyEight. This data allows for an examination of the political behavior of wealthy sports team owners. Variables in the data set include Owner, Team, League, Recipient, Amount, Election Year, and Party. My second section, titled 2021 Forbes Billionaires, uses two data sets from Kaggle. Both data sets consist of the public data of the 2021 Forbes Billionaires. The first data set I used contains seven variables. These variables include Name, NetWorth, Country, Source, Rank, Age, and Industry. The second data set I used comprises the same variables in addition to Residence, Citizenship, Status, Children, Education, and Self_made. These data sets originally come from Forbes. 
 
As I worked on my project, I kept many of the concepts of "good" visualizations in mind. First and foremost, I applied many lessons I learned from our Introduction to Data Visualization section of the course. One of the lessons I especially kept in mind was perception. Initially, I wanted to create stacked bar plots rather than faceted bar plots. However, I remembered that stacked bar plots do not make the best visualizations because of the difficulty of perceiving individual trends. As I learned from the course readings, relative comparisons need stable baselines, so I ultimately opted for faceted bar plots. Furthermore, I applied the lesson of sequential, diverging, and unordered color scales. I primarily used the unordered "Dark2" palette of scale_colour_brewer because I colored by or displayed unordered or categorical data on each of my visualizations. Although, I did have some flexibility regarding color scale due to the nature of the data and my visualizations. For instance, Bipartisan could be considered a neutral midpoint of the political spectrum, calling for a diverging color scale. However, I ultimately decided that an unordered color scale would be most appropriate since political party is a categorical variable. I wanted to construct a pie chart to display categorical variables but remembered that bar plots are the better choice. We are better able to interpret length-based comparisons than angles or areas. I also wanted to point out that I primarily relied on color vision deficient friendly color scales. Lastly, since viewers may have trouble interpreting visualizations for an abundance of reasons, I provided many accompanying tables or labels to my visualizations so that nothing was unclear from my visualizations alone.
  
Although bar plots may be better than pie charts, I also learned of the limitations of bar plots in the Expressing Uncertainty and Variability section of the course. Bar plots may misconstrue the true variability of data and inhibit interpretation. On the other hand, scatter plots display every data point of the data, which allows for an independent understanding of the data. Rather than constructing bar plots, I opted for scatter plots in several of my visualizations. For instance, I used a scatter plot to visualize each observed political donation by professional sports team owners. I also made a scatter plot visualizing all of the billionaires from the 2021 Forbes Billionaires List with Plotly. I constructed a scatter plot visualizing the average age of billionaires in different countries. The Expressing Uncertainty and Variability section taught me how to visualize averages properly using scatter plots and scale_colour_manual. 

However, I did construct many bar plots because bar plots are acceptable when visualizing counts of categorical data. The bar plots I made do not obscure variability because I used these plots to visualize counts of categorical data. The visualizations displaying net worth using bar plots are acceptable because each billionaire is only observed once in the data set. There is no variability of net worth for individual billionaires. Although I made quite a few bar plots, I did opt for the lollipop chart for a few visualizations. We discussed the lollipop chart in the Tidyverse Review section of the course. The lollipop chart may be better than the bar plot because it is often less visually overwhelming than the bar plot. However, I again only used the lollipop chart to visualize counts of categorical data.
  
Concepts from the Grammar of Graphics and Data Ethics section of the course also heavily guided my work. I heavily utilized the theme() component of ggplot as discussed in the Grammar of Graphics section. Editing components of the theme accounted for a considerable amount of the time I spent working on my visualizations. I learned so much more about theme() and adamantly enjoyed it. Using theme() allowed me to customize the font of titles, subtitles, axis labels, and the parameters of the plot margin and font size, among many other components. Concepts from the Data Ethics section of the course were also paramount to my project. Political donations from the data set are public information. Kaggle licenses the data as Public Domain. However, after creating many of my visualizations, I later found out that FiveThirtyEight published a piece using this data. The visualizations that I have made are different from those on FiveThirtyEight. The 2021 Forbes Billionaire Data is also public, as Kaggle users scraped this data from Forbes. Kaggle also licenses these data sets as Public Domain. 

Equally important, I learned that when deciding to exclude data in data visualization, you should have a good reason and explicitly state why you excluded points and state your reason for doing so. I decided to exclude owners who owned more than one team for my first political donations visualization. I felt this was a good choice since many owners own teams across leagues, which would have complicated the visualization. Additionally, I excluded observations of donations with an unavailable party association. I also decided to exclude points representing Bipartisan, but mostly Republican, Bipartisan, but mostly Democratic, and Independent donations. I did this because these parties represent a small portion of the observations in the data set. However, I made these exclusions clear and stated my reasons for doing so in my blog. I also excluded 4 data points in the visualization examining the changes in donations for NFL Team Owners. These data points represented an unavailable data point and three observations of donations to Independent organizations. Since the top 25 highest donations made by NFL owners only represent Republican, Democratic, and Bipartisan organizations, I decided to only look at the change in these types of donations over time. Although I excluded the points representing these parties for these two visualizations, I did not exclude these points in a later visualization detailing how much money prominent figures have donated. I decided there was no logical reason to do so. Additionally, I made this exclusion clear and stated my reason for doing so.
  
Other excluded points in the data set were excluded automatically by R. These points were the unavailable ages of billionaires. Since age was the only numerical variable displayed in the average age visualization, I received the warning “removed 104 rows containing missing values (geom_point)”. To avoid errors or warnings when running the blog, I decided to manually remove these values as well. However, I still made it clear that this visualization did not include the age of every billionaire, nor did the calculation of the average age of billionaires in each country include all observations in the data set. I also stated why this was the case. Lastly, I excluded points that were unavailable for the self-made variable. I did this because there seemed to be no reason why "N/A" needed a column on the chart. Again, I made this exclusion clear and stated my reason for doing so. 
  
Although I am satisfied with the work I've completed, there is also more work I wish I could have done. I had wanted to make at least three posts. However, I struggled for quite some time to find a third data set that fit the blog's theme. Eventually, I found a data set containing the evolution of the President and Vice President's salaries over time. I did want to note that this data is public and that Kaggle licenses the data set as Public Domain. Variables from this data set include year, name, party, term, salary, and position_title. I intended to construct at least 4 or 5 visualizations with this data. However, I had difficulty formulating ideas for these visualizations due to the limited number of variables in the data set. I spent a significant amount of time on the details of the visualizations in my other two posts. If I had more time, I would make visualizations displaying how the President and Vice President's salaries changed over time. I also would examine if there has been a single most prominent political party of the President throughout history. Lastly, I would create a visualization comparing the salaries of the President and Vice President. 
  
Furthermore, there are limitations to my visualizations. Many of these limitations of my visualizations lie in the tables I made using kableExtra. The information in the tables is hard to see when the blog is in night mode. Additionally, despite what I tried, I could not center the tables. I experienced great difficulty adjusting the sizes of these tables as well. The position of these tables is not very aesthetically pleasing. I also changed one of my kable() tables because of duplicates throughout the data set. Instead of showing the donations Charles Johnson made to each organization, with the numerical amount of donations made to each organization displayed, I just made a table displaying donations made to a few organizations without the count variable so that the visualization was not inaccurate. However, I adjusted the duplicates in the set for the last visualization specifically. I couldn't figure out how to visualize the tables in an aesthetically pleasing manner for the Forbes kable() tables. Furthermore, one limitation to my political donations visualizations specifically is that I could not re-level the color scale for my visualizations displaying public political donations by league or how much money team owners had made. One of the main limitations to my visualizations of Forbes Billionaires is that this data is from 2021. A new list exists for 2022.

  